The R scripts on this folder can be used to analyze the K+S model results produced by LSD when running the simulations.

The available R scripts are described in the model's "description.txt" file in the parent folder.

The R scripts require simulation results to be generated in LSD BEFORE they can be used. The scripts in this directory are pre-configured to run using data generated by configuration and sensitivity files available in the "data" subdirectory. Please check the instructions on each script on how to use LSD and the supplied configuration/sensitivity files to produce the required results files.

All R scripts are based on Monte Carlo (MC) techniques so each model configuration require data from several simulation runs to be analyzed. There is no fixed rules on how many runs are required to produce robust statistical results, but there are some rules of thumb in the case of K+S model:

 . Scripts code test: a bare minimum of 3-5 runs is technically required but the produced results are useless for any model analysis.
 . Qualitative scenario comparison: a minimum of 10-20 runs is required to differentiate qualitative model behavior under different configurations but most quantitative statistical measures are still unreliable.
 . Quantitative scenario comparison: a minimum of 50-100 is required for most variables to be properly evaluated in statistical terms but some high MC dispersion variables may require mode (rule of thumb: check when confidence intervals stop narrowing when adding more MC runs).
 . Sensitivity analysis screening: a minimum of 5-10 runs per sampled point in factorial space is recommended for variables with narrow MC dispersion
 . Sensitivity analysis statistics: a minimum of 10-20 runs per sampled point in factorial space is recommended for variables with narrow MC dispersion

The R scripts depend on the current "working directory" correctly set in R. They assume the working directory is ALWAYS set to the same folder where the scripts are. Use "getwd( )" at the console to check and "setwd( new-dir )" to change the working directory. The easiest way to ensure this is to create an RStudio project based on the (existing) R scripts directory. This also ensures you don't have to set it every time you start RStudio.

Statistical analysis scripts, like "KS-aggregates.R", can analyze files from a single MC experiment (one ".lsd" configuration file) or analyze and compare different MC experiments (each one in a separated ".lsd" configuration file). Sensitivity analysis scripts, like "KS-kriging-sobol-SA.R" must use data from a single LSD configuration (".lsd" file).

LSD results files (".res.gz" extension) must be not renamed, as they are already produced using the naming conventions expected by the R scripts in the proper folders, as well the remaining ancillary files used by sensitivity analysis scripts. Additionally, when comparing multiple experiments, the names of all involved LSD corresponding configuration files MUST share the same base name, that is, the filenames must differentiate only by a integer sequential suffix (e.g, "config1.lsd", "config2.lsd", etc.). Experiments to be compared must also have the same set of saved variables and number of time steps.

All LSD configuration files MUST be stored in the same folder/directory. Results and ancillary files MUST be in the same directory as configuration files or in a subdirectory named as the respective configuration file. For convenience, it is easier to have the LSD data folder as a subdirectory of the R working directory, where the R scripts are. The example configurations are in the folder named "data", and you can create other subdirectories inside the R working directory to hold your own configurations (remember to adjust the "folder" variable in the R scripts). You can generate your LSD results files directly in those subdirectories, so no file copying is ever needed or recommended (LSD should do this automatically if the configuration file is already located there). Just save your LSD configuration (.lsd file) to the desired subdirectory BEFORE starting the simulation runs. When there is more than a configuration file in a folder, LSD automatically creates additional subdirectories in this folder to keep your data organized, saving data from different configurations segregated. All the scripts account for this segregation transparently. There is no need to include the configuration-specific subdirectory names to the "folder" R variable.

The R scripts may have to be changed according to the type of LSD data files to be processed. All scripts have two critical variables to point to where/which data must be used:
 . "folder" (default is "data"): must have the relative path of your configuration files FROM the R working directory, that is, the folder where the these files (used to produce the data) are. It must NOT include the full path to the working directory. For instance, if the working directory is "C:\Users\Marcelo\LSD\Work\Test\R" and the data to be analyzed is in "C:\Users\Marcelo\LSD\Work\Test\R\my-exp", you must set "folder" to (just) "my-exp" (folder <- "my-exp").
 . "baseName" (default is "Sim"): if a single configuration (experiment) is being analyzed, it must define the FULL name of the LSD configuration used to produce the data. For instance, if your configuration file is "my-conf.lsd", you must set "baseName" to (just) "my-conf" (baseName <- "my-conf"). If analysis is for a set of experiments (see also "nExp" below), it must define the part of the configuration file name that does not change (before the integer suffix). For instance, if you have two configuration files named "my-conf1.lsd" and "my-conf2.lsd", you also must set "baseName" to (just) "my-conf" (baseName <- "my-conf").
 
The R statistical scripts also have a third critical variable to set:
 . "nExp": if a single configuration (experiment) is being analyzed, it must be set to 1. Otherwise, it must be set to the number of experiments to be compared in the same report(s). Experiment numbering must start from 1 and be sequential (e.g., "my-conf1.lsd", "my-conf2.lsd", etc.).

 The scripts for sensitivity analysis also have another critical variable:
 . "varName" (default is "U"): defines the name of the K+S model variable to be used for sensitivity analysis. For instance, if you want to check the sensitivity of the GDP growth rate, you must set "varName" to "dGDP" (varName <- "dGDP")
 
 Some other important variables for all scripts:
 . "iniDrop" (default is 0): the number of initial time steps to drop from the analysis. If set to zero, no initial time steps is dropped. Discarding non-required time steps proportionally reduce the script memory needs and may be required in case of memory allocation errors (after coresExp and coresMC are set to 1).

 . "nKeep" (default is -1): the number of total time steps to keep for the analysis, after initial time-step dropout (if iniDrop > 0). If set to -1, all time steps are kept. If set to a positive number, just the first nKeep time steps are kept. Discarding non-required time steps proportionally reduce the script memory needs and may be required in case of memory allocation errors (after coresExp and coresMC are set to 1).
 
 Other R script variables are available for optional adjustments (not in all scripts):

 . "mcStat" (default is "mean"): the type of summary statistic used for Monte Carlo (MC) analysis ("mean" or "median"). Despite less usual, the median is a more robust statistic to describe the MC experiment(s).

 . "mcDist" (default is "" or NULL): the name of distance metric to use. Common options are "euclidean" and "manhattan". For detail on these and the many additional available metrics, see function TSDistances in R package TSdist.
 
 . "CI" (default is 0.95): the confidence level (beta) to be used when building confidence intervals. It is the same as ( 1 - alpha ), alpha is the statistical significance level.
 
 . "bootR" (default is 999): is the number of bootstrap replications when "bootCI" is set to use bootstrap. It is recommended to be an odd number.
 
 . "bootCI" (default is "" or NULL): the technique to build the confidence intervals. The default is to use mean or median (according to "mcStat") asymptotic intervals. More precise (but slower to compute) bootstrap intervals can be generated using "basic" or "bca" bootstrap techniques.
 
 . "expVal" (no default): an R character (string) vector naming the experiments (according to "nExp") being analyzed, to be used on the reports legends.
 
 . "warmUpPlot"/"warmUpStat" (default 100/300): define initial periods to be ignored for plots and statistics purposes (applied on the effectivelly read cases, after "iniDrop" discards).
 
 There are many other parameters that can be adjusted. Check the comments on the scripts for the description of all adjustable parameters.